---
name: Validating fast analytical tools against ACTS framework to allow fast turn-around of detector designs
postdate: 2025-02-05
categories:
  - Analysis tools
durations:
  - 3 months
experiments:
  - ACTS
skillset:
  - Python
  - C++
  - Tracking
status:
  - Available
project:
  - IRIS-HEP
location:
  - Any
commitment:
  - Full time
program:
  - IRIS-HEP fellow
shortdescription: Validating fast analytical tools against ACTS framework to allow fast turn-around of detector designs
description: >
  Expected transverse momentum resolution (σ(pT)/pT) at a future electron-positron Higgs Factory is of the 
order of (10^−5⋅pT⊕10^−3). Achieving this ambitious goal requires innovative detector concepts. While detailed 
Monte Carlo simulations combined with sophisticated reconstruction software represent the gold standard for 
performance evaluation, this approach is often cumbersome and slow, making it impractical during the early stages 
of detector design. A fast feedback tool is therefore essential—one that is simple to use and does not rely on 
resource-intensive frameworks like Geant4. Such a tool should focus on intrinsic detector performance, 
minimizing sensitivity to reconstruction software tunings. It should be capable of rapid execution to enable
the exploration of multiple detector concepts, facilitating the identification of the most promising designs.
An early analytical framework addressing this need was introduced by R.L. Gluckstern in 1963 [Ref: NIM A24 (1963) 381–389], 
offering direct calculations based on simplifying assumptions such as negligible multiple scattering, uniformly spaced detector planes, 
and consistent hit resolution across layers. An enhanced calculation tool based on this foundation, relaxing these assumptions, 
allows for more realistic modeling. This direct calculation method, being analytical rather than simulation-based, is highly efficient. 
Validation against detailed simulation and reconstruction results from ATLAS and CMS has shown reasonable agreement. However, 
some limitations remain due to residual assumptions (e.g., discrete multiple scattering) and complexities in actual detector geometries, 
such as non-uniform material distribution as a function of η and ϕ.
Project Objective:
The current project aims to utilize the ACTS framework, in conjunction with a detector geometry such as the Open Data Detector, 
to simulate and reconstruct single muon tracks. This will enable direct comparisons between full simulation + reconstruction methods 
and the analytical calculation approach with identical detector descriptions.
Project Workflow:
1.	Acquire a basic understanding of track reconstruction and the ACTS framework.
2.	Simulate single muons, perform track reconstruction within ACTS, and obtain various resolutions.
3.	Get key detector parameters (e.g., hit resolution, detector layer positions) for input into the direct calculation tool.
4.	Run the calculation tool, determine resolutions, and compare results with those from ACTS simulations.

  - name: Charles Young
    email: young@slac.stanford.edu
  - name: Rocky Bala Garg
    email: rbgarg@stanford.edu
